Q1)
The CIA triad consists of:
Confidentiality (prevent access) leaking information
Integrity (prevent modification) modifying grades
Availability (prevent witholding) DDoS attack

Authenticity (verify identity) ssh keys
Non-repudian (people can't escape contracts that they've signed)

Q2)
A risk is an uncertainty in completing an objective.
A threat is a source of potential unwanted incident.
A vulnerability is a weakness in either the asset or the defences that can be exploited by threats.
[better answer]
A threat is any circumstance or event with the potential to cause harm to an information system. A
vulnerability is a weakness of the system (computer, network etc.) through which a threat can be realised.
A Threat exists outside of the information system considered. It is something (event, circumstances, people
etc.) that can potentially cause harm to an information system. Threats can be realised by exploiting existing
vulnerabilities. Whereas, a risk is the likelihood that a particular threat, will exploit a particular vulnerability
of a system resulting in a particular impact.

Q3)
Environmental threats
    Flooding destroying data
    Power outage
    Fire
    Government regulations (if not deliberate)
    Vermin biting wires
Deliberate threats
    Government
    Evil employees (sabotage)
    Trespassers looking for access to hardware
    Hackers on the internet
    Phising emails
Accidental threats
    User errors (bumping, falling)
    Manual data entries by tired staff
    Not backing up data
    Poor workplace cyber security policies and protocols
    Transmission errors (miscommunication)

Q4)
Five examples of vulnerabilities
    1. An unsanitised user input
    2. A file with permissions incorrectly set
    3. Simple passwords easy to bruteforce
    4. No backups
    5. No backup generators
Extra
    Building is poorly made
    doors aren't locked
    Lack of antivirus
    employee ignorance
    not updating software

Q5)
ARO 0.80 per year
SLE we lose roughly 3 hourse of uptime.
Thus our company loses $40/hr * 3hrs * 100 = $12000.
ALE = ARO * SLE = $9600

Assume the software works 100% thus reducing ARO to 0.
Thus it is more beneficial to buy the anti-virus for $4700 than lose $9600
for 3hrs of down time each year.
